(heavy metal riff)
Okay, so far we've actually just been
spending out time on the grid container
and we haven't spent any time on the grid items
or how to actually size them to be the size that we want.
So let's break that down,
we'll open up 09 sizing grid items
and open up sizing items.
Now let's give ourselves a bunch of items,
I'm gonna say dot item,
and I'm also gonna give a class of item dollar,
and that will give us item one, item two,
item three, item four.
Inside of that I'll just give our number again
and let's go nuts and give ourselves 30 items here.
That should give us 30 divs each
with a class of item and item 123
all the way through 30.
What do we got there?
Good, looking good.
Now let's just give ourselves a very basic
grid that we have here.
So grid, template, columns,
let's repeat five times one FR.
Got it, so let's give this a grid
of five by however many high that we need.
Alright, so how do you actually size
some of our items in it?
Well you might think well I can just
go into here and say like item nine,
well maybe we'll change the background of that
to be something like mistyrose,
and we should see item nine is now mistyrose
and if you were to give that a width of 500 pixels,
what happens?
Whoa, so this is very similar to how that last one worked
where we actually had an item.
What we did is we explicitly
put a width on the 500 pixel item,
and what CSS grid did is remember
that FR stands for free space
and before you can have free space
you have to use up the paid space.
So what CSS does is it says okay first,
item nine has to be 500 pixels wide,
so it takes the column that item nine is in
and it will size that to be 500 pixels wide.
And then it says alright, I'm done.
Got a bunch of extra space, who wants it?
Let's split it up evenly with one FR
throughout the rest of the columns.
So by sizing this 500 pixels
and similarly if I were to take that off
and I were to make my item nine really long,
like put some text in there without putting a space in it,
because if you put a space in it
it will just break onto the next line.
Let's say something inside of item nine
whether it's an image with a hard width
or a really long word or anything that is inside of it
is causing that item to be that wide,
then it's going to first allot the width of that column
because of the width of the content inside of it,
and then it will then divvy up the actual space
between the other two.
Okay that's good, but I'm not really
happy about the fact that it kind of takes
the entire column along for the ride.
So rather than relying on content width
or giving it a fixed width of something like 500 PX,
what we do is something called spanning in CSS grid,
and we can explicitly tell some of our items
to be a specific width.
So I can bring this back to nine.
And let's open up our dev tools
so we can sort of see what's going on,
gonna go to my layout tab and turn on a grid
inspector, make that black, beautiful, cool.
So we've got our numbers showing up
and now we have item nine here,
and I want this to take up the spot
where nine and 10 is,
and the way that we can do that
is something called spanning.
So we'll say grid, template, no grid column,
and we can say span two.
So if by default grid items just naturally flow
one after another and as there is space
for each one they will fit themselves
into the grid as they can.
However, if you wish for an item
to take up multiple spots inside of our grid,
you can tell it to span two.
So I'll give that a save and whoa,
okay look what happened here now.
So it still starts where it naturally did,
but now it is spanning two without giving
it any sort of explicit width
and then 10 was then bumped on to the next line
because that was the next available space
for 10 to actually go.
We'll talk a little bit more about that
when we talk about how grid auto flow dense works.
So span two, what would happen if we did span three?
Is it gonna go all the way,
place your bets ladies and gentlemen.
Buhhh, oh, what happened here?
Okay, so now we have a bit of a dead space here
and the reason behind that is
because the browser will lay out each one
one after another and as it gets to nine
it says okay, this one needs to span three
but I've only got space for two.
So what it's gonna do is it's going to start again
on the next line and leave those empty.
We'll talk about how do we,
like wouldn't it be nice if we could just put 10
and 11 right there?
And that's totally possible with the dense
option that I've been talking about.
Similarly, let's bring it back to two
so we can put it right there.
If you want to span multiple rows as well
you totally can, so it's just grid row,
and that is span two
and that will whoa, give us too high
and allow us to go.
And this is really starting to show the power
of CSS grid because I'm not doing any floats,
I'm not doing any absolute positioning,
I'm just putting the item for as wide as I want
and if I were to have another item before nine.
So here I would just put like a poop
or something like that in there, then it's going to
push it onto the next line
and figure out where can you possibly fit this item
where it makes sense?
Good, so span two, span two on row,
you can span them as much as you want.
What would happen if you were to span
more than you have available?
So maybe if I were to span something like 10,
whoa, that's kind of interesting there,
what did we have before?
How many numbers did we have?
We have six, but if I were to span 10
more than we had, it would automatically
force the grid to be larger than it wants,
and let's do a little zoom in investigation here.
Remember we talked about the solid line
being the end of the explicit grid?
We only told it to be five columns each,
one FR but however if it just can't fit itself,
it's going to start creating implicit columns
or implicit rows.
In this case it's creating implicit rows,
it makes extra ones and it knows
to just sort of keep filling them with the extra
items that we have.
Good, then in the next video,
what we're going to talk about is
spanning is great but what if I just want
to tell it exactly where I wish for this item to go?
And that's where we get into actually placing grid items.
(heavy metal riff)